

- user vs. kernel
   - user-level threading is its lightweight context switches
   - user-level threads are non-preemptive
   - No need for locks to create critical section



- Q1:  design of a multi-processor job scheduler. you will be asked to write pseudo code. Check review session recording for further details.
Study the lecture on scheduling
  - Study Section 5.5 (minus 5.5.2) from the textbook.
  - You can do the study questions given for the quizzes.
  - Study A2 (thread scheduler design) assignment
  - It would help to remember the scheduling algorithms and their trade-offs
  - Study the lecture on deadlocks – won’t be asked to apply deadlock algorithms on toy problems as is normally done. Instead you need to understand the differences among the different deadlock management approaches and what to pick for a given scenario.

- Q2: memory management and virtual memory management problem. There is no pseudo code here. You will be asked to proceed through a step-by-step design and incrementally add more features to the design.
  - Study the lectures on memory management and virtual memory
  - It is important to know the concepts as explained in the lectures.
  - Do the questions given for quizzes
  - You can look at the answers for the quizzes
  - Look at the questions from the past finals (only focus on the questions from memory and virtual memory).

- Q3: a simplified and more focused file system problem similar to A4
  - Study the lectures on file system


- Q4: virtual machines and cloud computing question
  - Study the lectures on VMs
  - Study the lectures on Cloud computing
  - Do the following problems
  - Describe the three types of traditional hypervisors.
     - Type 0 hypervisors - Hardware-based solutions that provide support for virtual machine creation and management via firmware
     - Type 1 hypervisors - Operating-system-like software built to provide virtualization and Also includes general-purpose operating systems that provide standard functions as well as  VMM  functions
     - Type 2 hypervisors - Applications that run on standard operating systems but provide  VMM  features to guest operating systems
  - Describe four benefits of virtualization.
  - Why VMMs are unable to implement trap-and-emulate based virtualization is some CPUs? What methods can we use in such CPUs to implement virtualization?
      - But kernel mode privilege mode code runs slower due to trap-and-emulate
      - Binary rewriting
      - Hardware virtualization (new processor mode)
      - Paravirtualization
  - Why is live migration possible in virtual environments?
  - How is live migration useful for cloud computing?
  - What is an advantage of public clouds? Why do we need private clouds (that is why all clouds are not public)?
  - Consider 100 machines in a public cloud and these machines are used to serve M users. Suppose those 100 machines are put in a private cloud. Would you expect those machines to serve more, less, or equal number of users there?
  - Why would we want to use serverless computing over SaaS?
  - Why would we want to use serverless computing over PaaS?
  - Why is edge computing better than cloud computing for certain applications?






