- Ruby is an interpreted, high-level, general-purpose programming language.
- Ruby is dynamically typed and uses garbage collection.
- It supports multiple programming paradigms, including procedural, object-oriented, and functional programming.

- The term pure object-oriented programming implies that all of the data types in the language are objects and all operations on those objects can be invoked by message passing.
- Multiple variables referencing the same object is called aliasing
- dup

- a = (b = 1 + 2) + 3
- nil

- Class names, module names, and constants should start with an uppercase letter.
- Class variables start with two “at” signs (@@).
- Local variables, method parameters, and method names should all start with a lowercase letter or with an underscore (_).
- Global variables are prefixed with a dollar sign ($), while
instance variables begin with a single “at” sign.

- Unstructured programming
Complex code: Difficult to read and write.
• Poor evolvability.
• Poor maintainability.
• Poor reusability.
  
- Structured programming
Allowed (some) abstraction from the underlying machine.
• Poor evolvability.
• Poor maintainability.
• Poor reusability.


- Procedural programming
Allows functional decomposition of a problem.
• Top-town design and stepwise refinement allow the problem to be broken down into (manageable) subproblems.
• Modular composition is made possible as solutions to subproblems can be coded into units of functionality (procedures and functions) or components



- Object-oriented programming
Encapsulation + Polymorphism + Inheritance
• Provides linguistic mechanisms to support functional decomposition along the notion of class.
• Allows us to view computation as a set of collaborating objects.
• Classes allow us to hide implementation details beneath interfaces.

















